TIMESPAN ENUMERATION PRELIMINARIES.

Four things taken two at a time gives six pairs. Timepoints A, B, X, Y taken
two at a time give six 2-element sets. We assign each of these 2-element sets a
roman numeral identifier:
    
    I   (A, B)
    II  {A, X}
    III {A, Y}
    IV  {B, X}
    V   {B, Y}
    VI  (X, Y)

Two timepoints enter into exactly one of three reltions with each other. Either
A < B, A == B, or B < A. Each such timerelation excludes the other two
absolutely.

The enumerative work that we're doing asks us to build up a catalog of
inequalities.  We set A < B in all cases because we insist that A and B
together define a timespan with positive duration. (This constraint reduces the
number of timerelations obtaining between A and B to exactly 1.) We likewise
set X < Y in all cases because we insist that X and Y define a timespan XY with
positive duration. (This constraint reduces the number of timerelations
obtaining between X and Y to exactly 1.) Finally, we insist that every
inequality we construct relate AB to XY. This means that at least one of the 12
timerelations available in classes {A, X}, {A, Y}, {B, X}, {B, Y} must appear
in every inequality we construct.

Altogether our constraints tell us that we are building up a library of
compound inequalities all of the following form.

    A < B && X < Y && ...

Every such inequality will comprise at least three and at most six parts.  We
omit "A < B && X < Y" and leave it understood as part of every inequality we
write.

The work of our enumeration then involves a consideration of the logical
well-formedness of each such composite inequality in turn.

The unpruned combinatorial space comprises 255 inequalities. How do we know
this?  We know this because each inequality we build must comprise the
following:

    from category I: the restriction A < B
    from category II: any of three restrictions, or no restriction
    from category III: any of three restrictions, or no restriction
    from category IV: any of three restrictions, or no restriction
    from category V: any of three restrictions, or no restriction
    from category VI: the restriction X < Y 

This gives 4 ** 4 == 256 combinations. But the combiantion that selects nothing
from categories II, III, IV & V is eliminated by our requirement that we relate
AB to XY in at least one way. This gives 256 - 1 == 255 combinations.
