Abjad?
======

Abjad is an interactive software system designed to help composers build up
complex pieces of music notation in an iterative and incremental way.  Use
Abjad to create a symbolic representation of all the notes, rests, staves,
tuplets, beams and slurs in any score.  Because Abjad extends the Python
programming language, you can use Abjad to make systematic changes to your
music as you work.  And because Abjad wraps the powerful LilyPond music
notation package, you can use Abjad to control the typographic details of the
symbols on the page.


Abjad extends LilyPond
----------------------

`LilyPond <http://www.lilypond.org>`__ is an open-source music notation package
invented by Han-Wen Nienhuys and Jan Niewenhuizen and extended by an
international team of developers and musicians.  LilyPond differs from other
music engraving programs in a number of ways.  LilyPond separates musical
content from page layout.  LiyPond affords typographic control over almost
everything.  And LilyPond implements a powerfully correct model of the musical
score.

You can start working with Abjad right away because Abjad creates LilyPond
files for you automatically.  But you will work with Abjad faster and more
effectively if you understand the structure of the LilyPond files Abjad
creates.  For this reason we recommend new users spend a couple of days
learning LilyPond first.

Start by reading about `text input <http://lilypond.org/text-input.html>`__ in
LilyPond.  Then work the `LilyPond tutorial
<http://www.lilypond.org/doc/v2.17/Documentation/learning/tutorial>`__.  You
can test your understanding of LilyPond by using the program to engrave of a
Bach chorale.  Use a grand staff and and include slurs, fermatas and so on.
Once you can engrave a chorale in LilyPond you'll understand the way Abjad
works with LilyPond behind the scenes.


Abjad extends Python
--------------------

`Python <http://www.python.org>`__ is an open-source programming language
invented by Guido van Rossum and further developed by a team of programmers
working in many countries around the world.  Python is used to provision
servers, process text, develop distributed systems and do much more besides.
The dynamic language and interpreter features of Python are similar to Ruby
while the syntax of Python resembles C, C++ and Java.

To get the most out of Abjad you need to know (or learn) the basics of
programming in Python.  Abjad extends Python because it makes no sense to
reinvent the wheel modern programming langauges have developed to find, sort,
store, model and encapsulate information.  Abjad simply piggy-backs on the ways
of doing these things that Python provides.  So to use Abjad effectively you
need to know the way these things are done in Python.

Start with the `Python tutorial <http://docs.python.org/tutorial/>`__.  The
tutorial is structured in 15 chapters and you should work through the first 12.
This will take a day or two and you'll be able to use all the information you
read in the Python tutorial in Abjad.  If you're an experienced programmer you
should skip chapters 1 - 3 but read 4 - 12.  When you're done you can give
yourself the equivlanent of the chorale test suggested above.  First open a
file and define a couple of classes and functions in it.  Then open a second
file and write some code to first import and then do stuff with the classes and
functions you defined in the first file.  Once you can easily do this without
looking at the Python docs you'll be in a much better position to work with
Abjad.


What next?
----------

The most important parts of Abjad are the interlocking objects that structure
the system.  Read about the way Abjad models pitch, duration, leaves,
containers, spanners and marks in the :doc:`Abjad reference manual
</reference_manual/index>`.

But note that important parts of the system are missing from the manual.  The
reason for this is that we completed the Abjad API months before we started the
manual.  This means that classes and functions you look up in the API may not
yet be documented in the manual.  The reference manual will eventually document
all parts of the system.  But until then check the API if the manual doesn't
yet have what you need.

Once you understand the basics about how to work with Abjad you should spend
some time with the :doc:`Abjad API </api/index>`.  The API documents all the
functionality available in the system.  Abjad comprises about 199,000 lines of
code.  About half of these implement the automated tests that check the
correctness of Abjad.  The rest of the code implements 58 packages comprising
459 classes and 526 functions.  All of these are documented in the API.


Mailing lists
-------------

As you begin working with Abjad please be in touch.

Questions, comments and contributions are welcomed from composers everywhere.

**Questions or comments?**
Join the `abjad-user <http://groups.google.com/group/abjad-user>`__ list.

**Want to contribute?**
Join the `abjad-devel <http://groups.google.com/group/abjad-devel>`__ list.
