Codebase
========


How the Abjad codebase is laid out
----------------------------------

The Abjad codebase comprises a small number of top-level directories:

.. shell::

   ls -x -F

Of these, it is in the ``tools`` directory that the bulk of the musical
reasoning implemented in Abjad resides:

.. shell::

   ls -x -F tools/

The remaining sections of this chapter cover the topics necessary to
familiarize developers coming to the project for the first time.


Removing prebuilt versions of Abjad before you check out
--------------------------------------------------------

If you'd like to be at the cutting edge of the Abjad development you first need
to check the project out from Google Code, and then teach Python and your
operating system about Abjad.  You can do this by following the steps below.

But before you do this you should realize that there are two ways to get Abjad
up and running on your computer.  The first way is by downloading a compressed
version of Abjad from the `Python Package Index
<http://pypi.python.org/pypi/Abjad/>`_.  You probably did this when you first
discovered Abjad and started to use the system.  The second way is by following
the steps below to check out a copy of the most recent version of the Abjad
repository hosted on Google Code.  If you already have a version of Abjad
running on your computer but you haven't yet followed the steps below to check
out from Google Code, then you probably downloaded a compressed version of
Abjad from the Python Package Index.

**Before you check out from Google Code you should remove all prebuilt versions
of Abjad from your machine.**

The reason you need to do this is that having both a prebuilt version of Abjad
and a Subversion-managed version of Abjad on your machine can confuse your
operating system and lead to weird results when you try to start Abjad.

If you installed Abjad via ``pip``, you can simply say:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ sudo pip uninstall abjad

to remove Abjad in one step. We recommend this as the simplest way of
installing and uninstalling the packaged version of Abjad. You can download
``pip`` from `<https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_.

If you are unable or uninterested in uninstalling the packaged version of Abjad
automatically with ``pip``, you'll have to uninstall manually.

To remove prebuilt versions of Abjad resident on your computer manually, you
need to find your site packages directory and remove the so-called Abjad 'egg'
that Python has installed there. After you remove the Abjad egg from your site
packages directory you will also need to remove the ``abj``, ``abjad`` and
``abjad-book`` scripts from ``/usr/local/bin`` or from the directory that is
equivalent to ``/usr/local/bin`` under your opearting system.

First note the version of Python you're currently running:

.. shell::

   python --version

This is important because you may have more than one version of Python
installed on your machine. (Which tends especially to be the case if you're
running a Apple's OS X.)

Then note that the site packages directory is a part of your filesystem into
which Python installs third-party Python packages like Abjad.  The location of
the site packages directory varies from one operating system to the next and
you may have to Google to find the exact location of the site packages
directory on your machine. Under OS X you can check
``/Library/Python/2.x/site-packages/``.  Under Linux  the site packages
directory is usually ``/usr/lib/python2.x/site-packages``.

Once you've found your site packages directory you can list its contents to see
if Python has installed an Abjad egg in it:

.. code-block:: bash

    site-packages$ ls
    Abjad-2.0-py2.6.egg        Sphinx-1.0.7-py2.6.egg     py-1.3.4-py2.6.egg
    Jinja2-2.5-py2.6.egg       docutils-0.7-py2.6.egg     py-1.4.0-py2.6.egg
    Pygments-1.3.1-py2.6.egg   easy-install.pth           py-1.4.4-py2.6.egg
    README                     guppy                      pytest-2.0.0-py2.6.egg
    Sphinx-1.0.1-py2.6.egg     guppy-0.1.9-py2.6.egg-info pytest-2.1.0-py2.6.egg
    Sphinx-1.0.4-py2.6.egg     py-1.3.1-py2.6.egg

Remove any Abjad eggs Python has installed in your site packages directory.

After you've done this you should check ``/usr/local/bin`` or equivalent to see
if the ``abj``, ``abjad`` or ``abjad-book`` scripts are installed there:

.. code-block:: bash

    bin$ ls
    abj      abjad    abjad-book

Remove any of the three scripts you find installed there so that you can use
the new versions of the scripts you will download from Google Code instead:

.. code-block:: bash

    bin$ sudo rm abj*

Now proceed to the steps below to check out from Google Code.


Installing the development version
----------------------------------

Follow the steps listed above to remove prebuilt versions of Abjad from your
machine.  Then follow the steps below to check out from Google Code.

1. Make sure Subversion is installed on your machine:

   .. code-block:: bash
   
      svn --version

   If Subversion responds then it is already installed.
   Otherwise visit the `Subversion <http://subversion.tigris.org>`_ website.

2. Check out a copy of the main line of the Abjad codebase:

   .. code-block:: bash

      svn checkout http://abjad.googlecode.com/svn/abjad/trunk abjad-trunk

3. Add the abjad trunk directory to your your ``PYTHONPATH`` environment
   variable:

   .. code-block:: bash 

      export PYTHONPATH="/path/to/abjad-trunk:"$PYTHONPATH

4. Alternatively you may symlink your Python site packages directory 
   to the abjad trunk directory:

   .. code-block:: bash

      ln -s /path/to/abjad-trunk /path/to/site-package/abjad

5. Finally, add ``abjad-trunk/scr/`` to your ``PATH`` environment variable:

   .. code-block:: bash

      export PATH="/path/to/abjad-trunk/scr:"$PATH

   You will then be able to run Abjad with the ``abjad`` command.

You now have a copy of the main line of the most recent version of the Abjad
repository checked out to your machine.
