How Abjad handles pitch. Motivation: pitch is handled a bunch of different ways
in different music software systems. It seems like at least half (or even more)
of articles describing music software systems spend at least a paragraph
describing the way that pitch is represented. Perhaps it makes sense for us to
detail the different ways that Abjad handles pitch and to explain why we
reached the decisions we did concerning the representation of pitch. So that's
a first category: pitch *representation*. Can we go one step further? Can we
also explain some of the ways we implement pitch *transformation*? Abjad's
rules regarding what happens when, for example, one pitch is subtracted from
another (to produce an interval) are nontrivial but should be easy to
understand when we lay out the entire regime. It seems like the decisions we
have reached regarding pitch transformation should applicable to essentially
any music software system and that, for whatever reasons, papers describing
music software systems almost never discuss this topic. So the paper allows for
a rich set of comparisons to the existing literature regarding pitch
representation and also a novel contribution in the form of a discussion on
pitch transformation. There are probably other systematic ways of thinking
about pitch that such an article would allow us, finally, to document, too.

2. "Implementation-independent analyses in music formalization." How do we get
ourselves -- and developers of other music software systems -- to express the
important notation-oriented problems solved during system development in an
implementation-independent way?

3. "From Music Representations to Operations on Music Representations."
Motivation: isn't there an awful lot of literature on music representation?
(How should pitch be represented?) And isn't there a dramatic silence on
*operations* on things (like subtracting one named pitch from another named
pitch?). We can address this point in a single paragraph attached to another
article. Or we can raise this point directly as the topic of its own article.
Possibly this makes for a very good verbal conference presentation that splits
the difference between literature analysis and provocation.